---
title: "Optimizing VEGFR2 Inhibitor Discovery: <em>Leveraging Molecular Descriptors for Streamlined Drug Development</em>"
excerpt: The research focuses on Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor 2 (VEGFR2) as a pivotal receptor in angiogenesis, with implications in diseases like cancer and macular degeneration. Current FDA-approved drugs face limitations, prompting the exploration of new VEGFR2 inhibitors using the Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship (QSAR) method. Studies employing QSAR modeling have identified promising candidate compounds, showcasing the potential of in silico screening. Building upon these findings, the proposed project aims to deepen the understanding of molecular descriptors for effective VEGFR2 inhibitors, ultimately constructing a QSAR model for predicting inhibition activity. This research may streamline drug discovery, offering innovative solutions for cancer, retinal diseases, and inflammatory conditions.
collection: Projects
---

Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor 2 (VEGFR2) emerges as a pivotal receptor in angiogen- esis, the process of forming new blood vessels. This mechanism holds significance in various diseases such as cancer, age-related macular degeneration, and inflammatory conditions like rheumatoid arthritis. In the context of cancer and macular degeneration, the overproduction of angiogenic factors, notably VEGF, hyperstimulates VEGFR2, leading to excessive angiogenesis [1]. Addressing this, the use of VEGFR2 inhibitors becomes imperative to curtail nutrient supply to cancerous cells, thereby offering potential therapeutic avenues for these conditions.

Although FDA-approved drugs like sorafenib and pazopanib target VEGFR2, their efficacy is hindered by side effects and resistance issues [2]. To enhance treatment outcomes, the exploration of new drugs becomes paramount. While this quest poses challenges, the Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship (QSAR) method offers a strategic link between molecular structures and effects, enabling the in silico screening of potential bioactive compounds. This approach minimizes the need for costly experiments in drug discovery.
In a study conducted by Salimi et al., the researchers employed QSAR modeling to predict the probability of activity for a large set of molecules, evaluating their potential to inhibit the VEGFR2 tyrosine kinase signaling pathway. They used a training set of these compounds with measured pIC50 values. The Random Forest (RF) model (RMSE: 0.74) was chosen as the best classification model for this purpose. This QSAR analysis allowed the selection of two candidate compounds which were comparable to pazopanib and sorafenib [3].
In another study the researchers focused on understanding the QSAR of 4-aminopyrimidine-5- carbaldehyde oxime derivatives as VEGFR-2 inhibitors. They then selected the structural descriptors as numerical encoded parameters representing chemical structures, thus consolidating the remaining descriptors into a data matrix for model development. Further, they built predictive models using multiple linear regression (GA-MLR) (R2: 0.942) and support vector machines (GA-SVM) (R2: 0.915), assessing their accuracy with an external test set and validation methods [4].

Through a meticulous examination of the current biomedical research landscape, our proposal strategically builds upon existing studies, aiming to complement and elevate ongoing efforts. Previous research successfully identified potential inhibitory molecules through QSAR models. Aligning with these achievements, our proposal takes a step further by concentrating on the identification of key molecular descriptors crucial for recognizing effective VEGFR2 inhibitors. The approach aims to deepen the understanding of specific features essential for inhibitory efficacy.
The primary objective of our project is to construct a QSAR model for predicting the inhibition activity of VEGFR2 inhibitors sourced from the ChEMBL database. The resulting QSAR model will hold the potential to assess the efficacy of novel compounds in VEGFR2 inhibition. This approach may have the potential to streamline the early phases of drug discovery for a spectrum of therapeutic applications, including anti-cancer, retinal diseases, and inflammatory diseases therapies. By saving valuable time and resources, we hope that our research contributes to the advancement of innovative and targeted medical solutions.
